README.md, before:

Information about PalEON met driver processing.
Original: Jaclyn Hatala Matthes, jaclyn.hatala.matthes@gmail.com, 10 June 2014
Updates: Christy Rollinson, crollinson@gmail.com, January 2015, September 2015

This directory contains the uncorrected, bias-corrected, and final versions of both the site-level PalEON 
met drivers (Phase 1a) and regional drivers (Phase 2, formerly Phase 1b). 

Directories in /projectnb/dietzelab/paleon/met_regional/ are as follows:
1. ccsm4/ contains the copied output from the down-scaled artificial neural network procedure. 
It is simply copied over from /projectnb/dietzelab/paleon/create_met/R1i1P1/Scripts/output/ann_all/$VAR/netcdf 
(Bjorn's file processing set-up).
2. cruncep/ contains the original CRUNCEP driver data downloaded by Bjorn and used to run the ANN procedure.
3. bias_corr/ contains the bias-corrected down-scaled CCSM4 output 
	— bias_corr_original is Jackie’s version that still had a jump in the CRUNCEP splice
4. fix_precip/ contains scripts and NADP precip data used to correct the precipitation frequency distribution 
for Phase 1a and 1b bias-corrected output
5. phase1a_met_drivers_v4.1/ is the most recent version - this one is bias-corrected and the precipitation is 
   adjusted to the disturibution from the NADP dataset.
6. phase1b_met_regional_v2.1/ contains the final version of the regional met drivers with all corrections from 
   Phase 1a applied.
7. phase1a/1b_old_met_releases/ is a directory that contains old met releases. v1 is the original down-scaled output, 
   and for Phase 1a, v2 is after timestamps are corrected, v3 is after bias-correction, and v4 is after precipitation 
   correction.  v4.1 is after re-running the bias correction (all var + precip) and v4.2 is after correcting a leap 
   year error in v4.1

The processing code steps occurred in the following order:
(CR note: there are several ways these functions could be parallelized in the future to speed things up)
1. Bias-correct the CCSM4 ANN down-scaled output with bias_correct.sh, writing the files to bias_corr/regional_monthly/
	— these scripts require that you load cdo/1.6.3rc2  (module load cdo/1.6.3rc2)
	- NOTE: wind does not get bias-correct because it’s really funky
2. Split files back into monthly using format_bias_output.sh (requires cdo/1.6.3rc2)
3. Copy CCSM4 files (wind) and CRUNCEP files (all vars) into final_output folder that houses the current regional data using copy_ccsm4.sh and copy_cruncep.sh
4. Use add_met_leap_regional.R to add leap years to February months by repeating Feb 28th.
5. Use rewrite_timestamps.R (qsub submit_rewrite_timestamps.sh) to rewrite the timestamps and to make sure they are continuous days since 0850-01-01
	— these get written to corr_timestamp, so you need to make this folder & sub-folders for each variable
6. Precip Fix
	6a) Format the precip adjustment using fix_precip/format_nadp.R
	6b) Use fix_precip/fix_precip_sites.R (for Phase 1a) or fix_precip_regional.R (for Phase 1b) to correct the 
precipitation distributions based on the 30-year daily measured precipitation at NADP sites (fix_precip/nadp/).
	— NOTE: The region adjust will take 1.5+ days to run
	— NOTE: current scripts will require you to move the precipf_corr to precipf (precipf becomes precipf_orig) 
	— NOTE: something is weird with the final adjusted precipf in 1900, so in the next step we will replace ALL VARIABLES in 1900 with the met from 1899.  We need to move everything as a unit so the met files work together & we don’t have a sunny, rainy day with low humidity.
7. Extract sites from regional bias-corrected files to bias_corr/regional_monthly/sites/ with parse_sites.sh
	 — these scripts require you to load nco/4.3.4 (module load nco/4.3.4)
8. Compress files & do some house keeping (moving & renaming files) using compress_files.sh



These files contain bias-correction and post-processing steps to be executed after the PalEON meteoroglogical downscaling of global 
circulation model output (past1000 simulation = 850-1850; historic simulation = 1850-2005) to the CRUNCEP timestep and grid (6hr, 0.5-degrees). 


The bias-correction adjusts the monthly mean of the downscaled GCM output to the monthly mean of CRUNCEP data in the overlapping 1961-1990 
period, and then corrects this bias back in time to 850 for radiation, precipitation, and temperature. The bias correction for humidity is 
slightly different, to account for a large model jump between the past1000 and historic GCM runs. The method for this correction assumes the 
same monthly means from 1835-1849 and 1850-1864.

Commit message:

Updated README workflows
also a quick adjustment of precip limits

README.md, after:

Information about PalEON met driver processing.
Original: Jaclyn Hatala Matthes, jaclyn.hatala.matthes@gmail.com, 10 June 2014
Updates: Christy Rollinson, crollinson@gmail.com, January 2015, September 2015

This directory contains the uncorrected, bias-corrected, and final versions of both the site-level PalEON 
met drivers (Phase 1a) and regional drivers (Phase 2, formerly Phase 1b). 

Directories in /projectnb/dietzelab/paleon/met_regional/ are as follows:
1. ccsm4/ contains the copied output from the down-scaled artificial neural network procedure. 
It is simply copied over from /projectnb/dietzelab/paleon/create_met/R1i1P1/Scripts/output/ann_all/$VAR/netcdf 
(Bjorn's file processing set-up).
2. cruncep/ contains the original CRUNCEP driver data downloaded by Bjorn and used to run the ANN procedure.
3. bias_corr/ contains the bias-corrected down-scaled CCSM4 output 
	— bias_corr_original is Jackie’s version that still had a jump in the CRUNCEP splice
4. fix_precip/ contains scripts and NADP precip data used to correct the precipitation frequency distribution 
for Phase 1a and 1b bias-corrected output
5. phase1a_met_drivers_v4.2/ is the final set of the site drivers that MIP 1 ran off of; there’s a weird thing in 852 
   that affected some models
6. phase1_met_regional_v2/ contains the most recent (final?) version of the regional met drivers with all corrections 
   from Phase 1a applied.
   6a. There will soon be sub-folders in here for daily and monthly driver output
7. phase[1a/1b/2]_old_met_releases/ is a directory that contains old met releases. v1 is the original down-scaled output, 
   and for Phase 1a, v2 is after timestamps are corrected, v3 is after bias-correction, and v4 is after precipitation 
   correction.  v4.1 is after re-running the bias correction (all var + precip) and v4.2 is after correcting a leap 
   year error in v4.1

The processing code steps occurred in the following order:
(CR note: there are several ways these functions could be parallelized in the future to speed things up)
Some of the details of the script names may currently be different, but now scripts should be excited in their alpha-
numeric order
1. Bias-correct the CCSM4 ANN down-scaled output with bias_correct.sh, writing the files to bias_corr/regional_monthly/
	— these scripts require that you load cdo/1.6.3rc2  (module load cdo/1.6.3rc2)
	- NOTE: wind does not get bias-correct because it’s really funky
2. Split files back into monthly using format_bias_output.sh (requires cdo/1.6.3rc2)
3. Copy CCSM4 files (wind) and CRUNCEP files (all vars) into final_output folder that houses the current regional data 
using copy_ccsm4.sh and copy_cruncep.sh
4. Use add_met_leap_regional.R to add leap years to February months by repeating Feb 28th.
5. Use rewrite_timestamps.R (qsub submit_rewrite_timestamps.sh) to rewrite the timestamps and to make sure they are 
   continuous days since 0850-01-01
	— these get written to corr_timestamp, so you need to make this folder & sub-folders for each variable
        — NOTE: This is also the step where everything gets masked to a consistent land cover & 1900 is replaced with 
                1901
6. Precip Fix
	6a) Format the precip adjustment using fix_precip/format_nadp.R
	6b) Use fix_precip/fix_precip_sites.R (for Phase 1a) or fix_precip_regional.R (for Phase 1b) to correct the 
precipitation distributions based on the 30-year daily measured precipitation at NADP sites (fix_precip/nadp/).
	— NOTE: The region adjust will take 1.5+ days to run
7. QA/QC — generate some animations at different temporal animations at key intervals to check for missing data &
   consistent cell represetnation
8. Distribution formatting — move files & rename precipf_corr to precept to package for distribution; compress into
   .tar.bz2 files
9. Aggregate ready-to-go sub daily drivers to daily or monthly drivers as bonus distributions
Extract sites from regional bias-corrected files to bias_corr/regional_monthly/sites/ with parse_sites.sh should happen
last
	— these scripts require you to load nco/4.3.4 (module load nco/4.3.4)



These files contain bias-correction and post-processing steps to be executed after the PalEON meteoroglogical downscaling of global 
circulation model output (past1000 simulation = 850-1850; historic simulation = 1850-2005) to the CRUNCEP timestep and grid (6hr, 0.5-degrees). 


The bias-correction adjusts the monthly mean of the downscaled GCM output to the monthly mean of CRUNCEP data in the overlapping 1961-1990 
period, and then corrects this bias back in time to 850 for radiation, precipitation, and temperature. The bias correction for humidity is 
slightly different, to account for a large model jump between the past1000 and historic GCM runs. The method for this correction assumes the 
same monthly means from 1835-1849 and 1850-1864.
